[dev_guides] Update the Qt Creator developer guidelines (#4067)
qgis/QGIS-Documentation: source/docs/developers_guide/qtcreator.rst

   :local:

QtCreator is an IDE from the makers of the `Qt library <https://www.qt.io>`_.
With QtCreator you can build any C++ project, but it's really optimised for
people working on Qt based applications (including mobile apps).

Installing QtCreator
=====================

Qt Creator is available on all major platforms and can be downloaded from
https://www.qt.io/download (Go the open source route).
The installation procedure depends on your platform.

If you are running a Unix-like platform, you can use the command line,
eg on Debian: 

.. code-block:: bash

>   sudo apt install qtcreator qtcreator-doc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  sudo apt-get install qtcreator qtcreator-doc
```

Reviewer 2: I think `apt install` is indeed the new recommended way?

Reviewer: ah ok didn't know that. I'm using `aptitude` and not `apt` ;)

|

QtCreator will parse the project and you will be prompted for a build location
and options in the :guilabel:`Configure Project` dialog.

Since we want QGIS to have debugging capabilities we will only enable the
debug entry and fill it with our build location:

#. Check |checkbox| :guilabel:`Select all kits` enabling the :guilabel:`Desktop`
   entry
#. Uncheck all but the |checkbox| :guilabel:`Debug` sub item
#. Fill the path with the build directory. For our purpose, we create a
   specific build dir for QtCreator:

   .. code-block:: bash

    $HOME/dev/cpp/QGIS/build-master-qtcreator

   It's probably a good idea to create separate build directories for different
   branches if you can afford the disk space.

   .. image:: img/configureProject.png
      :width: 100%

|

That's the basics of it. Press the :guilabel:`Configure Project` button and
QtCreator will start scanning the source tree for autocompletion support and
do some other housekeeping stuff in the background.

.. image:: img/configurationDone.png
   :width: 100%

|

We want to tweak a few things before we start to build.

Setting up your build environment
==================================

> Click on the :guilabel:`Projects` icon on the left of the QtCreator window.

Author: To vs On: any reference to the use of these words, please? I kept what was previously used and sounds good to me. But English is not among my first languages.

> Click on the :guilabel:`Projects` icon on the left of the QtCreator window.

Reviewer 3: "To the left of" means that it is outside the QtCreator window.

> Click on the :guilabel:`Projects` icon on the left of the QtCreator window.

Author: Here, we are not out of the Qtcreator window, do we?

> Click on the :guilabel:`Projects` icon on the left of the QtCreator window.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps: "in the left sidebar of the QtCreator window"?

.. image:: img/leftPanel.png

> Select the :guilabel:`Build` settings tab (normally active by default).

Author: Are you sure it's worth all these details? It took me time to understand what you were referring to so I'd prefer to keep it simple here, particularly given that it's anyway what is active by default.

> Select the :guilabel:`Build` settings tab (normally active by default).

Reviewer 3: I included it because I could not find out how to get to the dialogue with the settings.

.. image:: img/buildSettings.png

|

The dialog shows the ``Debug`` build configuration and allows you to

> edit settings under the :guilabel:`CMake` section. While the default

Reviewer 3: I could not find a CMake section in Qt Creator 4.5.2 on Ubuntu 18.04.2 (I started with an empty project).

Author: Same context here. See the buildSettings image, you have a bold Cmake frame title in the right panel.

Reviewer 3: Sorry, I was looking at the PR without the illustrations.  It looks fine from the illustrations, but this is not what I experienced, so I have to check again (I don't have that computer available here now).

Author: Since this is based on the cmakelists contents, if you are not trying to build, I'm afraid you won't get the same dialog.

configuration should be enough for a first pass, depending on your needs,
you may want to enable more features such as:

* **WITH_3D = ON** for 3D rendering

> * **WITH_ASTYLE = ON** to use QGIS custom reindent scripts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **WITH_ASTYLE = OFF** to use QGIS custom reindent scripts
```

We can use system astyle on any recent system. This is no longer required.

> * **WITH_CUSTOM_WIDGETS = ON** to add QGIS custom widgets for interface design

Reviewer: never understood well ``WITH_CUSTOM_WIDGETS``. All my builds have this flag = OFF but I can use all the custom widget in Qt Designer to create the plugins.

Reviewer 2: You probably have it installed from the repository too?

Reviewer: probably yes. But I'm pretty sure month ago I just have the compiled version installed and no repository packages..

Press :guilabel:`Apply Configuration Changes`.

> By default, Qt Creator uses all the CPU cores available to speed the build with

Reviewer 2: I think that's only true with ninja and with make it will use 1 by default. Which also makes me think that maybe in here there should just be a description for ninja, or is there a good reason to only offer this as an option?

Author: > I think that's only true with ninja and with make it will use 1 by default.

not the case according to https://doc.qt.io/qtcreator/creator-build-settings.html#qmake-build-steps (if my understanding is correct)

maximum parallelization. To avoid your computer freeze, you'd better specify a
lesser number of cores. Under the :guilabel:`Build Steps` section:

#. Press the :menuselection:`Add build step -->` menu and select
   :guilabel:`Custom Process Step`
#. Fill the new form as follows:

   * :guilabel:`Command`: ``make``
   * :guilabel:`Arguments`: ``-j4`` to use 4 cores (setting depends on your device)
   * :guilabel:`Working directory`: ``%{buildDir}``

.. image:: img/customProcess.png

|

.. note::

  Also, if you want to speed your build times, you can do it with ``ninja``, an
  alternative to ``make`` with similar build options. You'd need to set it as
  the :guilabel:`CMake generator`:
  
  #. Open :menuselection:`Tools --> Options --> Build & Run --> Kits`
  #. Select the :guilabel:`Desktop (default)` kit entry, displaying its properties
  #. Press :guilabel:`Change...` next to :guilabel:`CMake generator`

> You are now ready to build. Press the |build| :sup:`Build` icon at the left

Reviewer 3: "build icon" -> "build button" ?

Author: ```suggestion
You are now ready to build. Press the |build| :sup:`Build` button at the left
```

bottom of the dialog (or :kbd:`Ctrl+B`) to launch the project build! Qt Creator

> will begin compiling and this may be long the first time, depending on your

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
will begin compiling and this may take some time the first time, depending on your
```

device.

> At the end of the compilation, you can run QGIS pressing the |runInstall|

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At the end of the compilation, you can run QGIS by pressing the |runInstall|
```

:sup:`Run` button.

The compilation of QGIS also generates binaries in the build directory.
Hence you can execute QGIS from the command line using:

.. code-block:: bash

 cd $HOME/dev/cpp/QGIS/build-master-qtcreator

>  output/bin/qgis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 ./output/bin/qgis
```

> Sometimes you may want to install QGIS as an executable, out of the build

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sometimes you may want to install QGIS as an executable, outside the build
```

directory.

> #. If you do not have root access or do not want to overwrite existing QGIS

Reviewer 2: I would probably reformulate this to be the recommendation. Installing into the system should really only be used in production if there's a need for custom builds. On any developer setup, custom install prefix is the way to go.

#. When the build is complete, you'll find the :file:`qgis` executable in
   the :file:`${HOME}/apps/bin` folder.

.. 
    All this section is commented since it conveys information I could not confirm
    or I'm not sure it's necessary since I get good results without.
    Review for devs are more than welcome to sort this out.

    We now want to add a custom process step. Why? Because QGIS can currently only
    run from an install directory, not its build directory, so we need to ensure
    that it is installed whenever we build it. Under 'Build Steps', click on the
    'Add BuildStep' combo button and choose 'Custom Process Step'.

    Now we set the following details::

    Enable custom process step: [yes]

    Command: make

    Working directory: $HOME/dev/cpp/QGIS/build-master-qtcreator

    Command arguments: install

    .. image:: img/image07.jpeg

    You are almost ready to build. Just one note: QtCreator will need write
    permissions on the install prefix. By default (which I am using here) QGIS is
    going to get installed to ``/usr/local/``. For my purposes on my development
    machine, I just gave myself write permissions to the /usr/local directory.

>     To start the build, click that big hammer icon on the bottom left of the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    To start the build, click the big hammer icon on the bottom left of the
```

Reviewer 3: "hammer icon" - "hammer button" ?
